To preserve the user pri-
vacy in 5G systems, there 
should be mutual agree-
ments and trust models 
among various stakehold-
ers involved in the process 
such as user, network 
operator, service provider, 
application developer, and 
manufacturer on data 
usage and storage. There-
fore, 5G will require better 
mechanisms for account-
ability, data minimization, 
transparency, openness, 
and access control.

the security functionalities will be deployed in the 
application plane in software, security leveraging 
SDN can be referred to as software defined secu-
rity [4].

Security Solutions for NFV
The security of VNFs through a security orches-
trator in correspondence with the European Tele-
communications Standards Institute (ETSI) NFV 
architecture is presented in [14]. The proposed 
architecture  provides  security  not  only  to  the 
virtual functions in a multi-tenant environment, 
but  also  to  the  physical  entities  of  a  telecom-
munication network. Using trusted computing, 
remote verification and integrity checking of vir-
tual systems and hypervisors is proposed in [15] 
to provide hardware-based protection to private 
information and detect corrupt software in virtu-
alized environments. In NFV systems, sophisticat-
ed security protection solutions such as firewalls 
and IDSs can be used to prevent outside attacks. 
Moreover,  identity  and  access  management 
mechanisms (e.g., role-based access control) can 
be used to mitigate the impact of insider attacks. 
Infrastructure-level  attacks  can  be  prevented 
by continuous monitoring of the resource con-
sumption of each user and preventing malicious 
requests according to a blacklist of IP addresses.

In order to increase the trust between differ-
ent entities, a chain of trust relationships needs 
to be created and maintained in NFV environ-
ments throughout its life cycle. Solutions based 
on cryptographic techniques, such as message 
stream encryption, can be used to guarantee the 
confidentiality of VNFs. Furthermore, the account-
ability and trust management can be utilized by a 
VNF provider to know whether its software is run-
ning without any modification in the infrastructure 
provider’s network. Secure outsourcing is anoth-
er viable solution in NFV to transfer the sensitive 
information to external networks. It will not only 
protect sensitive information but also validate the 
integrity of data. Moreover, security-preserving 
migration mechanisms establishing secure inter-
faces with the authorized source and destination 
parties, and detection and reporting of any mali-
cious activities during migrations are needed to 
enable secure VM migration.

Security Solutions for 
Mobile Clouds and MEC
Most proposed security measures in MCC revolve 
around the strategic use of virtualization technol-
ogies, the redesign of encryption methods, and 
dynamic  allocation  of  data  processing  points. 
Hence, virtualization comes as a natural option 
for securing cloud services since each end node 
connects to a specific virtual instance in the cloud 
via a virtual machine (VM). Security is provided 
through the isolation of each user’s virtual connec-
tion from other users. Virtualized in-cloud security 
is one such virtualization solution to secure MCC. 
For specific security threats such as HX-DoS, 
specific  solutions  such  as  learning-based  sys-
tems  (e.g.,  [16])  are  more  useful  than  generic 
approaches. For example, learning-based systems 
take a certain number of samples of packets and 
analyze  them  for  various  known  attributes  to 
detect and mitigate threats.

To secure the mobile terminals, anti-malware 

solutions are installed on the mobile terminal or 
hosted  and  served  directly  from  the  cloud.  In 
MCC data and storage, the security framework 
will consist of energy-efficient mechanisms for the 
integrity verification of data and storage services 
in conjunction with a public provable data pos-
session scheme and some lightweight compro-
mise-resilient storage outsourcing. For application 
security, some proposed frameworks are based 
on securing elastic applications on mobile devic-
es for cloud computing, a lightweight dynamic 
credential generation mechanism for user identity 
protection, an in-device spatial cloaking mecha-
nism for privacy protection, as well as MobiCloud, 
which  is  a  secure  cloud  framework  for  mobile 
computing and communication.

On the side of MEC, there are limited works 
on the topic of security; however, the use of gate-
ways at strategic points on the networks is highly 
recommended. An IoT gateway is a typical exam-
ple of such deployments. Other recommended 
security strategies include ensuring that the appli-
cation hosted at the edge server authenticates 
any  user  attempting  to  access  the  application 
resources. The MEC server should be configured 
to protect applications and data storagee at the 
edge server from intrusion. Also, mobile devic-
es should be required to authenticate the edge 
application accessing from the edge server, and 
the MEC platform should give assurance of data 
integrity [17].

Security Solutions for Privacy in 5G
5G  must  embody  privacy-by-design  and  ser-
vice-oriented privacy-preserving approaches. To 
preserve the user privacy in 5G systems, there 
should be mutual agreements and trust models 
among various stakeholders involved in the pro-
cess such as user, network operator, service pro-
vider, application developer, and manufacturer 
on data usage and storage. Therefore, 5G will 
require better mechanisms for accountability, data 
minimization, transparency, openness, and access 
control [7]. A hybrid cloud-based approach is also 
required where mobile operators are able to store 
and process highly sensitive data locally and less 
sensitive data in public clouds. In this way, opera-
tors will have more access and control over data 
and can decide where to share it.

 For location privacy, anonymity-based tech-
niques must be applied where the subscriber’s 
real identity could be hidden and replaced with 
pseudonyms. Encryption-based practices are use-
ful in this case; for instance, a message can be 
encrypted before sending to a location-based ser-
vices (LBS) provider. Techniques such as obfusca-
tion are also crucial, where the quality of location 
information is reduced in order to protect loca-
tion privacy. Moreover, location-cloaking-based 
algorithms are quite useful to handle some major 
location privacy attacks such as timing and bound-
ary  attacks  [7].  For  IMSI  catching  attacks,  one 
ongoing solution for protecting subscribers’ iden-
tities is to use TMSI, which is generated randomly 
and assigned to the UE at regular intervals. The 
long-term IMSI is utilized only in the case of fault 
recovery and when a TMSI is not yet allocated. 
Another way might be to adopt a passive method 
that will allow detection of fake base stations that 
capture the subscriber’s IMSI. The authors in [12] 

Authorized licensed use limited to: Texas Tech University. Downloaded on January 19,2022 at 01:18:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

41

IEEE Communications Standards Magazine • March 2018