5G access units

Macro
cell

Edge
cloud

Illegal
intercept

Mobile core-
centralized
functions

Centralized NFV/SDN-
based processing

DoS
attacks

Micro 
MicMM croc
MicMM cro 
Cells
Cellsells
CeCells
o rk
et w
traffic

Fla s h  n

Internet
Int
Intnternernernetetet
Internet

m

g fr o
et

h re ats o rigin atin
In te r n

T

User privacy

IoT devices

Unified access

IoT devices

D2D

IoT Radio

IoT radios

Fake base
station

Figure 2. 5G network and the threat landscape.

tion of network control can also make the control-
ler a bottleneck for the whole network in the case 
of saturation attacks. By enabling programmabil-
ity, most network functions can be implemented 
as SDN applications. If malicious applications are 
granted access, or critical application program-
ming interfaces (APIs) are exposed to unintended 
software, a havoc can be spread across the net-
work [7].

The current SDN architecture (i.e., OpenFlow) 
requires the data forwarding elements to store 
traffic flow requests until the controller updates 
the flow forwarding rules. Hence, the data plane 
elements can also be prone to saturation attacks 
since the forwarding elements, such as OpenFlow 
switches, have limited resources to buffer unsolic-
ited (TCP/UDP) flows. Furthermore, this depen-
dence on the controller requires the control-data 
planes channel to be resilient to security attacks 
unlike the current optional use of security proto-
cols and long restoration delays in large networks. 
Redundant or multiple controllers may solve the 
challenge  of  controller  availability  or  increase 
resilience to security attacks. However, misconfig-
uration of forwarding elements or inter-federated 
conflicts due to multiple controllers will hinder 
network-wide security policy enforcement [4].

Security Challenges in NFV
Even though NFV is highly important for future 
communication  networks,  it  has  basic  secu-
rity challenges such as confidentiality, integrity, 
authenticity, and non-repudiation [7]. From the 
point of view of its use in mobile networks, it is 
presented in [7] that the current NFV platforms 
do not provide proper security and isolation to 
virtualized telecommunication services. One of 
the main challenges persistent in the use of NFV 
in mobile networks is the dynamic nature of VNFs 
that leads to configuration errors and thus security 
lapses [8]. Moreover, VNFs are vulnerable to typ-
ical cyber-attacks such as spoofing, sniffing, and 

DoS. NFV is also vulnerable to a special set of 
virtualization threats, such as side-channel attacks, 
flooding attacks, hypervisor hijacking [9], malware 
injection,  and  virtual  machine  (VM)  migration 
related attacks, as well as cloud-specific attacks. 
Moreover, private deployments of NFV are vul-
nerable only to malicious insiders (e.g., a mali-
cious administrator), since remote access to the 
system is prevented. Due to the common acces-
sibility of the infrastructure, a malicious user or a 
compromised provider of VNF can interfere with 
the operations of the infrastructure by inserting 
malware or manipulating network traffic.

Operational interference and misuse of shared 
resources are considered as infrastructure-level 
attacks on NFV. Due to the common accessibility 
of physical infrastructure resources, an attacker 
can interfere with operations of the infrastructure 
by inserting malware or manipulating network traf-
fic. In these kinds of resource misuse attacks, the 
victim can have no benefit of shared or dedicated 
resources. The maintenance of trust in virtualized 
NFV systems is also a big challenge. Usually, phys-
ical network devices are installed and configured 
by a trusted employee, and there is established 
trust of the device. However, because VNFs fetch 
dynamically from the cloud, some level of trust 
mechanism is needed to prevent malicious VNFs. 
Further challenges are highlighted in Table 1.

Security Challenges in 
Mobile Clouds and MEC
Since cloud computing systems comprise vari-
ous resources, which are shared among users, 
it is possible that a user spreads malicious traf-
fic to tear down the performance of the whole 
system,  consume  more  resources,  or  stealthi-
ly access resource of other users. MEC, on the 
other hand, comprises different complementary 
technologies interoperating in an open ecosystem 
where virtualization and distributed computing 
are harnessed by service providers to deploy and 
serve applications to end users. Given that MEC 
is relatively in its infancy, coupled with the diver-
sity of MEC technologies, there is potential for 
malicious attacks and privacy issues. Since MEC 
extends cloud computing capabilities to the edge 
of mobile networks, the level of protection that 
can be offered to the edge hosts is low compared 
to  what  is  obtainable  in  traditional  large  data 
centers. Similarly, in multi-tenant cloud networks 
where tenants run their own control logic, inter-
actions can cause conflicts in network configura-
tions. Mobile cloud computing (MCC) migrates 
the  concepts  of  cloud  computing  into  the  5G 
ecosystems.  This  creates  a  number  of  security 
vulnerabilities  that  mostly  arise  with  the  archi-
tectural and infrastructural modifications in 5G. 
Therefore, the open architecture of MCC and the 
versatility of mobile terminals create vulnerabilities 
through which adversaries could launch threats 
and breach privacy in mobile clouds [10].

In  this  work,  we  categorize  MCC  threats 
according to targeted cloud segments into front-
end, back-end, and network-based mobile security 
threats. Detailed descriptions of each cloud seg-
ment and their threat landscapes are contained in 
[7]. The threat landscape at the front-end range 
from physical threats to application-based threats. 
On the back-end platform, threats are mainly tar-

38

Authorized licensed use limited to: Texas Tech University. Downloaded on January 19,2022 at 01:18:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

IEEE Communications Standards Magazine • March 2018