ENABLING 5G VERTICALS AND SERVICES THROUGH NETWORK SOFTWARIZATION AND SLICING

Overview of 
5G Security Challenges and Solutions

Ijaz Ahmad, Tanesh Kumar, Madhusanka Liyanage, Jude Okwuibe, Mika Ylianttila, and Andrei Gurtov

Abstract

5G networks will use novel technological con-
cepts  to  meet  the  requirements  of  broadband 
access everywhere, high user and device mobility, 
and connectivity of massive number of devices 
(e.g., the Internet of Things) in an ultra-reliable 
and affordable way. Software defined networking 
and network functions virtualization leveraging 
the advances in cloud computing such as mobile 
edge computing are the most sought out tech-
nologies to meet these requirements. However, 
securely using these technologies and providing 
user privacy in future wireless networks are the 
new concerns. Therefore, this article provides an 
overview of the security challenges in clouds, soft-
ware defined networking, and network functions 
virtualization, and the challenges of user privacy. 
Henceforth, this article presents solutions to these 
challenges and future directions for secure 5G 
systems.

Introduction
According to the Fifth Generation Public Private 
Partnership (5G-PPP), 5G will connect about 7 
trillion wireless devices or things, shrink the aver-
age service creation time from 90 hours to 90 
minutes, and enable advanced user controlled pri-
vacy [1]. By connecting all aspects of life, 5G aims 
at a digital society that requires high service avail-
ability and security using a diverse set of technolo-
gies. Therefore, the concepts of cloud computing, 
software defined networking (SDN), and network 
functions virtualization (NFV) are sought out to 
meet the growing user and service demands with-
in the constraints of capital expenditures (CapEx) 
and operational expenses (OpEx) through flexible 
network operation and management.

Cloud computing provides an efficient way for 
operators to maintain data, services, and applica-
tions by bringing technologically distinct systems 
into a single domain on which multiple services 
can be deployed to achieve a higher degree of 
flexibility  and  availability  with  less  CapEx  and 
OpEx.  Mobile  edge  computing  (MEC),  using 
the concepts of cloud computing, will empower 
the network edge to process delay-sensitive and 
context-aware applications in close proximity of 
users or things. Softwarizing network functions 
will enable portability and flexibility of network-
ing systems and services. SDN enables network 
function softwarization by separating the network 
control  from  the  data  forwarding  planes,  and 

enabling programmability of both planes. Hence, 
SDN  brings  innovation  in  networking  through 
abstraction  and  programmability  on  one  hand 
and simplifies network management through log-
ically centralized control of the network on the 
other hand.

NFV provides the basis for placing various 
network functions in different network perim-
eters  and  eliminates  the  need  for  function 
or  service-specific  hardware.  SDN  and  NFV, 
complementing each other, improve network 
elasticity,  simplify  network  control  and  man-
agement, break the barriers of vendor- specific 
proprietary solutions, and thus are considered 
the core technologies in the transformation of 
networks for 5G by 5G-PPP. Network slicing, 
leveraging NFV and SDN, enables the 5G net-
work infrastructure to share the same resources 
for multiple use cases such  as the Internet of 
Things (IoT), enhanced broadband, and critical 
communication [1]. A generic 5G deployment 
scenario using these key technologies is depict-
ed in Fig. 1.

However, recent research in these technol-
ogies reveals potential security challenges that 
must  be  addressed  in  order  to  ensure  securi-
ty of new 5G services and infrastructures, and 
users. For example, multi-tenant shared cloud 
infrastructures among multiple virtual network 
operators require strict isolation at multiple levels 
to avoid illegal resource consumption and main-
tain integrity of users’ information of different 
operators [2]. According to the 5G-PPP Phase 
1  Security  Landscape  [1],  network  slicing  has 
several open security challenges such as security 
isolation of network slices and security of inter-
slice communications [3]. Moreover, program-
mable network architectures like SDN require 
strong authentication and authorization for appli-
cations to avoid misuse of the network resourc-
es exposed to applications through the control 
plane. Similarly, misconfigurations of virtual net-
work functions (VNFs) can lead to inter-feder-
ated  conflicts  creating  jeopardy  in  the  whole 
network [4]. Since 5G will connect every aspect 
of life to the network, having most users’ infor-
mation stored and shared online, maintaining 
user privacy, will be highly challenging.

Furthermore,  wireless  communication  sys-
tems have been prone to security vulnerabilities 
from the very inception. In 1G wireless networks, 
mobile phones and wireless channels were target-
ed for illegal cloning and masquerading. In 2G 

Digital Object Identifier:
10.1109/MCOMSTD.2018.1700063

Ijaz Ahmad, Tanesh Kumar, Madhusanka Liyanage, Jude Okwuibe, and Mika Ylianttila are with the University of Oulu;  
Andrei Gurtov is with Linköping University.

36

Authorized licensed use limited to: Texas Tech University. Downloaded on January 19,2022 at 01:18:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

IEEE Communications Standards Magazine • March 20182471-2825/18/$25.00 © 2018 IEEE