Smart
city

Smart
devices

Smart
mobility

Smart energy/
smart grid

Smart health

Services

Access
network

Core
network

Legacy

RRU & DAS

SDN & NFV

Cloudlets hosting applications

Configurable
devices

C-RAN

SDN & NFV

Figure 1. 5G deployment scenarios and key technologies.

wireless networks, message spamming became 
common for not only pervasive attacks but inject-
ing false information or broadcasting unwanted 
marketing information. In 3G wireless networks, 
IP-based communication enabled the migration 
of Internet security vulnerabilities and challeng-
es in the wireless domains. With the increased 
necessity of IP-based communication, 4G mobile 
networks enabled the proliferation of smart devic-
es, multimedia traffic, and new services into the 
mobile  domain  [5].  This  development  led  to  a 
more complicated and dynamic threat landscape. 
With  the  advent  of  5G  wireless  networks,  the 
security threat vectors will be bigger than even 
before with greater concern for privacy.

Therefore, it is crucial to highlight the security 
challenges that not only are threatening due to 
the wireless nature of mobile networks, but also 
exist in the potential technologies that are highly 
important for 5G. The rest of the article is orga-
nized as follows. We describe the key security 
challenges, followed by security solutions for the 
highlighted security challenges. We highlight the 
5G security standardization activities at the time 
of writing this article, and finally we conclude the 
article.
Key Security Challenges in 5G
5G needs robust security architectures and solu-
tions since it will connect every aspect of life to 
communication networks. Therefore, we investi-
gate and highlight the important security and pri-
vacy challenges in 5G networks (depicted in Fig. 
2) and overview the potential solutions that could 
lead to secure 5G systems. The basic challeng-
es in 5G highlighted by Next Generation Mobile 
Networks (NGMN) [6] and highly discussed in 
the literature are as follows:
•  Flash network traffic: There will be a high 
number of end-user devices and new things 
(IoT).

•  Security of radio interfaces: Radio interface 
encryption keys are sent over insecure chan-
nels

•  User  plane  integrity:  There  is  no  cryp-
tographic integrity protection for the user 
data plane

•  Mandated  security  in  the  network:  Ser-
vice-driven constraints on the security archi-
tecture lead to the optional use of security 
measures.

•  Roaming security: User-security parameters 
are  not  updated  with  roaming  from  one 
operator  network  to  another,  leading  to 
security compromises with roaming.

•  Denial of service (DoS) attacks on the infra-
structure: There are visible etwork control 
elements and unencrypted control channels.
•  Signaling storms: Distributed control systems 
require coordination, for example, non-ac-
cess stratum (NAS) layer of Third Generation 
Partnership Project (3GPP) protocols.

•  DoS attacks on end-user devices: There are 
no security measures for operating systems, 
applications, and configuration data on user 
devices.
The 5G design principles outlined by NGMN 
beyond radio efficiency include creating a com-
mon composable core and simplified operations 
and  management  by  embracing  new  comput-
ing and networking technologies. Therefore, we 
focused on the security of those technologies that 
will fulfill the design principles outlined by NGMN 
(i.e., mobile clouds, SDN, and NFV). Table 1 pro-
vides  a  summary  of  different  types  of  security 
threats and attacks, the targeted elements or ser-
vices in a network, and the technologies that are 
most prone to the attacks or threats are ticked. 
These security challenges are briefly described in 
the following sections.

Security Challenges in SDN
SDN  facilitates  innovation  in  communication 
networks  and  simplifies  network  management 
by enabling programmability and logically cen-
tralizing the network control planes. These two 
features are significantly important for future net-
works; however, they also open the network to 
security challenges. For example, the SDN con-
troller updates or modifies flow rules in the data 
forwarding  elements.  This  control  information 
traffic can easily be identified, making it a visible 
entity in the network and rendering it a favorite 
choice for DoS attacks. Similarly, the centraliza-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Texas Tech University. Downloaded on January 19,2022 at 01:18:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

37

IEEE Communications Standards Magazine • March 2018