Standardization 
bodies

Work groups

Major security areas in focus

Milestones

3GPP

Service and System Aspects 
Security Group (SA3)

Security architecture, RAN security, authentication 
mechanism, subscriber privacy, network slicing

TR 33.899 Study on the security aspects of the next genera-
tion system, TS 33.501: Security architecture and procedures 
for 5G system

5GPPP

5GPPP Security WG

Security architecture, subscriber privacy, authentica-
tion mechanism

5G PPP Security Landscape (White Paper) June 2017.

IETF

NGMN

ETSI

I2NSF, DICE WG, ACE WG, 
DetNet WG

Security solutions for massive IoT devices in 5G, user 
privacy, network security functions (NSFs)

RFC 8192, RFC 7744, Deterministic Networking (DetNet) 
Security Considerations

NGMN 5G security group 
(NGMN P1 WS1 5G security 
group)

Subscriber privacy, network slicing, MEC security

5G security recommendations: Package 1 and 2, and 5G 
security: Package 3

ETSI TC CYBER, ETSI NFV 
SEC WG

Security architecture, NFV security, MEC security, 
privacy

ETSI GS NFV-SEC 010, ETSI GS NFV- SEC 013 ETSI GS NFV-
SEC 006 and ETSI GS MEC 009

Table 3. Security activities of various standardization bodies.

have proposed one potential solution to protect 
subscribers from IMSI catching attacks in 5G net-
works.

 During the standardization of 5G, strong pri-
vacy regulations and legislation should be taken 
into  account.  The  regulatory  approach  can  be 
classified into three types. First is government-lev-
el regulation, where governments mainly make 
country-specific privacy regulations and through 
multi-national organizations such as the United 
Nations (UN) and European Union (EU). Second 
is the industry level, where various industries and 
groups  such  as  3GPP  and  ETSI  collaboratively 
draft the best principles and practices to protect 
privacy. Third is the consumer-level regulations, 
where desired privacy is ensured by considering 
consumers’ requirements [7].

5G Security Standardization
5G security standardization is still in the drafting 
phase,  and  various  key  organizations  are  pro-
viding  immense  contributions  toward  its  rapid 
development, as highlighted in Table 3. In March 
2015,  3GPP  set  the  deadline  for  defining  5G 
standards around 2020. The same year, NGMN 
published a white paper on 5G [6] that covered 
a wide range of topics including virtualization, 
privacy, radio architecture, availability, and IoT, 
among others. For 5G security standardization, 
the NGMN P1 WS1 5G security group is mainly 
gathering requirements and providing their sug-
gestions. In January 2016, the SA3 group [3] of 
3GPP started working to standardize the 5G secu-
rity aspects and provide contributions to 5G-PPP 
initiated projects. The major task was to propose 
5G security architecture by analyzing threats and 
requirements. The SA3 group of 3GPP covers all 
security aspects including RAN security, authenti-
cation mechanisms, and network slicing, among 
others [1].

The Open Networking Foundation (ONF) is 
dedicated to accelerating the adoption of SDN 
and NFV, and publishes technical specifications 
including specifications for security of these tech-
nologies [4]. Also, the ETSI Industry Specification 
Group  (ISG)  for  NFV  Security  (ISG  NFV  SEC) 
is responsible for security specifications of NFV 
platforms. ISG NFV SEC has highlighted the need 
for a standard interface in ETSI NFV architecture 
for  adding  security  functions  that  can  react  to 

potential security threats in real time. In 2014, 
ESTI  MEC  ISG  was  formed  to  look  after  MEC 
security standards and empower NFV capabili-
ties within the RAN to deliver security and robust-
ness. The NGMN 5G security group is working 
on identifying the security requirements for MEC 
and proposing corresponding recommendations. 
Regarding privacy, subscription privacy is one of 
the core security areas focused in 3GPP SA3. For 
example, privacy enhanced identity protection 
deals with safeguarding the IMSI from adversaries 
on the air interface. SA3 is also taking valuable 
input from the FSAG group GSMA to identify sub-
scriber privacy challenges [1]. Furthermore, the 
standards suggested by the Internet Engineering 
Task Force (IETF) will be critical because 5G will 
use various Internet protocols. The Internation-
al Telecommunication Union (ITU) continuously 
gathers contributions from regional organizations 
like ETSI and ARIB, and proposes recommenda-
tions for the standardization organizations.

Conclusion
5G  will  use  mobile  clouds,  SDN,  and  NFV  to 
meet  the  challenges  of  massive  connectivity, 
flexibility, and costs. With all their benefits, these 
technologies also have inherent security challeng-
es. Therefore, in this article we have highlighted 
the  main  security  challenges  that  can  become 
more threatening in 5G unless they are properly 
addressed. We have also presented the poten-
tial security mechanisms and solutions for those 
challenges. 5G still has to be deployed; thus, the 
security challenges in these technologies and their 
solutions will become more vivid. However, the 
integration of IoT seems to raise more security 
concerns, specifically in terms of privacy. There-
fore, novel security solutions need to be sought 
out that use the development in, for example, arti-
ficial intelligence and context awareness to enable 
proactive network forensics and response lever-
aging the programmability enabled by SDN and 
runtime, but need-based security service insertion 
in various network perimeters using NFV.

Acknowledgment
This work was supported by TEKES Finland and 
the  Academy  of  Finland  under  projects  The 
Naked Approach, Towards Digital Paradise, and 
SecureConnect. Andrei Gurtov was supported by 

42

Authorized licensed use limited to: Texas Tech University. Downloaded on January 19,2022 at 01:18:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

IEEE Communications Standards Magazine • March 2018