measures in MCC revolve 
around the strategic use 
of virtualization technol-
ogies, the redesign of 
encryption methods and 
dynamic allocation of data 
processing points. Hence, 
virtualization comes as a 
natural option for securing 
cloud services since each 
end-node connects to a 
specific virtual instance 
in the cloud via a Virtual 
Machine.

Security solutions

Primary focus

Target technology

SDN

NFV

Cloud

Links

Privacy

DoS, DDoS detection

Security of centralized control points

Configuration verification

Flow rules verification in SDN switches

Access control

Control access to SDN and core network elements

Traffic isolation

Ensures isolation for VNFs and virtual slices

Link security

Provide security to control channels

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

Identity verification

User identity verification for roaming and clouds services

Identity security

Ensure identity security of users

Location security

Ensure security of user location

IMSI security

Secure the subscriber identity through encryption

Mobile terminal security

Anti-malware technologies to secure mobile terminals

Integrity verification

Security of data and storage systems in clouds

HX-DoS mitigation

Security for cloud web services

Service access Control

Service-based access control security for clouds

Table 2. Potential security solutions for targeted threats [7].

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

they use cloud-based data storage and NFV fea-
tures. Hence, the 5G operators have no direct 
control of the data storage place in cloud envi-
ronments. As different countries have different 
levels of data privacy mechanisms depending on 
their preferred context, the privacy is challenged 
if the user data is stored in a cloud in a different 
country.

Potential Security Solutions
In this section, we highlight security solutions for 
the security challenges outlined in the previous 
section. The challenges of flash network traffic 
can  be  solved  by  either  adding  new  resourc-
es or increasing the utility of existing systems 
with novel technologies. We believe that new 
technologies such as SDN and NFV can solve 
these challenges more cost effectively. SDN has 
the capability to enable runtime resource (e.g., 
bandwidth)assignment to particular parts of the 
network as the need arises. The SDN control-
ler can gather network stats through the south-
bound API from network equipment to see if 
the traffic levels increase. Using NFV, services 
from the core network cloud can be transferred 
toward the edge to meet the user requirements. 
Similarly, NFV enables the provision of virtual 
slices or resources at runtime to meet the grow-
ing traffic demands or surges in traffic at differ-
ent network locations.

The  security  of  the  radio  interface  keys  is 
still a challenge, as it needs secure exchange of 
keys encrypted like the proposed Host Identity 
Protocol (HIP)-based schemes in [7]. The same 
end-to-end encryption protocol can be used for 
user plane integrity. Roaming security and net-
work-wide  mandated  security  policies  can  be 
achieved  using  centralized  systems  that  have 
global visibility of the users’ activities and network 
traffic behavior (e.g., SDN). Signaling storms will 
be more challenging due to the excessive con-
nectivity of UEs, small base stations, and high user 

mobility. The cloud radio access network (C-RAN) 
and edge computing are the potential problem 
solvers  for  these  challenges,  but  the  design  of 
these technologies must consider the increase 
in signaling traffic as an important aspect of the 
future networks as described by NGMN. Solu-
tions for DoS and saturation attacks, and other 
security challenges described in the previous sec-
tion, are listed in Table 2, and the methodologies 
are described below.

Security Solutions for SDN
Once the basic security challenges inherent in 
SDN  are  addressed,  SDN  can  be  a  potential 
problem  solver  in  terms  of  security  in  com-
munication networks. Having a global view of 
the network, centralized control, and program-
mability  in  network  elements,  SDN  enables 
network-wide consistent security policies and 
facilitates quick threat identification through a 
cycle  of  harvesting  intelligence  from  the  net-
work  resources,  states,  and  flows.  Therefore, 
the SDN architecture supports highly reactive 
and proactive security monitoring, traffic anal-
ysis, and response systems to facilitate network 
forensics, the alteration of security policies, and 
security service insertion [13].

One of the basic features of SDN is flow- or 
packet-level granularity that provides transparency 
in terms of packet origin or source, the route it 
takes, and even the content. Security applications 
can gather samples of flows or packets through 
the control plane from any network perimeter 
to check their content regardless of the network 
ingress or egress ports, unlike traditional networks 
in which the security appliances normally reside 
in the entry points. This capability of SDN lays the 
foundation for network-wide consistent security 
policies, early threat identification at any network 
location, and quick response by updating the flow 
tables to route traffic to intrusion detection sys-
tems (IDSs) or firewalls at runtime. Since most of 

40

Authorized licensed use limited to: Texas Tech University. Downloaded on January 19,2022 at 01:18:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

IEEE Communications Standards Magazine • March 2018